Computing with Python
CS0079
Module 4 Submodule 1


[Scanned from Image]:
Computing with Python

CS0079
Module 4 Submodule 1



Subtopic 1
User-defined Functions
After this submodule, the learner should be able to:
▪ Create, test, and run user-defined functions using def.
▪ Understand and apply the function components.
▪ Construct functions that use default value.
▪ Write functions that either uses default or return a value.
▪ Understand programs that apply local variables.

Functions
- a sequence of instructions that performs a task.
Recall: input(), type(), print() are built-in functions.
Python allows us to also define our own functions.

Functions: Define Your Own Function
def()
- used to make new function will be defined.
Components:
• Function Header
• Function Body
• Descriptive String

Functions: Define Your Own Function
Components:
• Function Header
• starts with a keyword def
• followed by a function name
• followed by a pair of parentheses with the input parameter inside
and ends with a colon ( : )
Parameters are variables that the user need to supply to a function as input
and can be manipulated in the body of the function.

Functions: Define Your Own Function
Components:
• Function Body
• where the step-by-step instructions to be executed upon calling the
function was placed.
• it is important to note that the instructions in the body of function
must be indented, and in the case of multiple instructions, all the
instructions must be of the same indent.
• at the end of function body, it can return some output. As can be
seen on the example, it indicates that part is optional, some functions
can return some output or not.

Functions: Define Your Own Function
Components:
• Descriptive String
• After defining the function header, an optional descriptive string can
be placed in the middle of triple single or triple double quotes.
• This can be used to describe in more detail the task that will be
performed by the function.
• The descriptive string is also accessed by the command help().

Functions: Define Your Own Function
Example:
An example of a function that asks for a name and prints hello + the input
name. The function must be called first, for the instructions to be executed.
Different strings was used as input to hello_name().
If the user inputs a number instead of a string, Python will still execute the function until something
goes wrong.

Functions: Functions with default value


[Scanned from Image]:
Functions: Functions with default value

hello()
In [7]: def hello(name="stranger",hour=-1):

Hello stranger!
Good day!

asks for name (of type string)
and hour of the day (of type int)
then use the inputs for greeting
rae Hello Jasmine!
Good day!

hello(“Jasmine” )

print("Hello " + name + “!")

hello(name="Ivy", hour=14@@)
if hour == -1:
print("Good day!")
else:
if hour <= 1200:
print("Good morning!")
elif hour <= 1900: Hello Jaclyn!
print("Good afternoon! ") Good morning!
else:
print("Good evening!") In [12]: hello(hour=20@@)

Hello Ivy!
Good afternoon!

In [11]: hello(hour=1000, name="Jaclyn”)

Hello stranger!
Good evening!

FEU ALABANG — FEU DILIMAN FEU TECH


Functions: Functions with default value


[Scanned from Image]:
Functions: Functions with default value

In [4]: def another_hello(name="stranger” ):

asks for a string name’ then
prints hello + name

if a name is not supplied by user, default name to print is “stranger”

print("Hello " + name + "!")

another_hello(“Justine”)

Hello Justine!

another_hello()

Hello stranger!

FEU ALABANG FEU DILI

IMAN FEU TECH


Functions: Functions with return value
The function simply computes
for the area of a rectangle given
its length and width.
At the end of the function, the
keyword return was used to
indicate the variable that will be
output by the function.
Notice that the output of the
function was assigned to a
variable.

Functions: Functions with return value
Also notice that different data types of input was
performed on the first and second call of
area_of_rectangle().
As such, checking the type of area_1, the value is
different from the type of area_2.
This only goes to show that Python gives the user
freedom to assign variables to different data
types.

Functions: Local Variables
Question: Can we access the variables that was defined inside functions?
Take area_of_rectangle() for example, can we use the variable area even
when we already exit the function?
Answer: No.
When defining a function, Python creates a separate listing of variables for it.
This list of variables can only be accessed during the execution of the
function.

Functions: Local Variables
However, the variables that are local to the function is not part of the
variables tracked across the whole Python notebook.

Exercise:
Write a program that calculates and prints the number of minutes in a year.
Write a program that takes the radius of a sphere (a floating-point number)
as input and outputs the sphere’s circumference.

Q&A SESSION


[Scanned from Image]:
fi
©
tH

Q&A SESSION




[Scanned from Image]:
FEU ALABANG ~— FEU DILIMAN FEU TECH


References
1. SPARTA (2023). SP202: Computing in Python. Linang: Development Academy of the Philippines.
https://linang.dap.edu.ph.
2. Scratch, M. (2020). Python Algorithms: A complete guide to learn python for data analysis, machine
learning, and coding from scratch.
3. Matthes, E. (2019). Python crash course: A hands-on, project-based introduction to programming. San
Francisco, CA. No Starch Press.
4. Pomperada, J. & Moises, R. (2019). Fundamentals of python programming. Manila. MindShaper Co. Inc.
5. Ahmad, I. (2020). 40 Algorithms Every Programmer Should Know: Hone Your Problem-Solving Skills By
Learning Different Algorithms And Their Implementation In Python. Packt Publishing.
6. Codings, Z. (2019). Computer Programming And Cyber Security For Beginners: This Book Includes:
Python Machine Learning, Sql, Linux, Hacking With Kali Linux, Ethical Hacking. Coding And Cybersecurity
Fundamentals.

